There are more lifecycle hooks, you will pretty much never need all of them but it is nice to be aware
of all of them
so that you always know which lifecycle hooks exist in case you need a certain functionality and I will
add them in the order they execute here.
So componentDidLoad is one lifecycle hook and always be aware that all these lifecycle hooks are of course
transformed by stencil such that you still get a native web component but with code added, that these
different methods will be executed at appropriate points of times,
for example in componentDidLoad, whenever your component is added to the DOM.
Now there is actually one lifecycle hook running before componentDidLoad and that is componentWillLoad
and stencil will add code that executes this method or the code in this method
right before your component is about to load.
Now here I will add a console log statement, componentWillLoad and I will also output this stock
symbol because it is worth noting that this actually is output at a point of time where stencil
can already read your attributes,
so it actually already has access to the DOM or to the environment into which your component is rendered
but is right before stencil executed your render function and created the DOM for this component.
So the custom element has already been mounted to the DOM essentially but it has not yet populated the
DOM with the shadow DOM content you could say,
so then componentWillLoad will execute.
It is worth noting that in componentWillLoad, you can still change a property that is a state property like
fetchedPrice and that change will be taken into account in the upcoming render function call because
remember, componentWillLoad runs before this render function was executed for the first time.
So if you change some initial value here, it will not be inefficient or anything like that,
it will simply be a new value that is conserved in the render function call. If you change a value,
a stateful value in componentDidLoad, then render will run again and this can be inefficient.
It is of course not
in this case where fetchStockPrice will also change some stateful property because here we actually
have an asynchronous action that loads new data that should result in a re-rendering.
But if I will just call this fetch price and set this equal to zero,
well then this would be very inefficient because this would now rebind a stateful property, fetchedPrice
and would therefore result in a rerun of the render function which already ran a second ago basically
or less than a second when componentDidLoad executes.
So we ran it twice
and if I just wanted to make such a synchronous update to a stateful property, it would be better to do
that in componentWillLoad,
that's just a little side note. Now after componentDidLoad,
we also have other lifecycle hooks,
we can have updates in our component. And for that, we have componentWillUpdate,
so you will probably recognize the pattern by now and I'll
console log componentWillUpdate here, by the way
I will also add console log to componentDidLoad so that we can see that here too, componentDidLoad.
componentWillUpdate will fire right before it will re-render because some prop or state property changed,
so whenever it is about to call re-render and then we have componentDidUpdate whenever this was done,
so whenever it did call render.
So here we'll have console log
componentDidUpdate.
Now we also have a hook that is related to the component being removed and that is componentDidUnload
there, I will output componentDidUnload.
This is when the component was removed from the DOM
and this is a great place for any clean-up work you need to do.
Now if I save that, let's see that all in action, if I reload here, we have
WillLoad and DidLoad and then actually the update hooks too, they run right at the start because we do an
update right at the start in this component. We do call fetchStockPrices in componentDidLoad after
all
and this is an async call and after like half a second when the response from this API is there, we do
actually update the fetch price,
that is why we see the calls to these lifecycle hooks as well
and if I now remove that here in the elements tab and we go to console, we also see componentDidUnload,
so we see this lifecycle hook in action too. That is the lifecycle of any stencil component,
always important to remember, this will just result in a bunch of code being added to the native web
component that gets spit out
but this is always an order that is guaranteed by that generated code so that you have different places
where you can run your own logic whenever your component is about to change or just changed or is about
to be loaded or about to be removed.